Before we dive into this property I just talked about,
I just wanted to add some information to flex direction and flex wrap because you could also write
these two properties in a shorthand and this shorthand is called flex flow and would then be defined
like this, so row and wrap,
this would basically be the shorthand for flex direction, the row and flex wrap, the wrap.
I will just stick to the separate properties because I think it's easier to read and better to learn.
However which property am I referring to
now to ensure that this behavior, so that the height will always follow the maximum height defined
right here?
Well, this property is align items, like that and the default value for align items is stretch, this one
right here.
If we apply that and reload the page, you can see nothing changes,
we simply have the same behavior that we had before.
If I change this value now to center, like that and reload the page again, then you can see that the height suddenly
changed because with this align items property right here, we can have an impact onto the height of our
elements
and this is totally wrong.
I'm just saying that because this is what you could think right here once you see that
but if we now apply our knowledge and this knowledge was that if we change the flex direction from
row to column, that this means the main axis also changes, so let's add column right here, like
that and reload the page,, then you can see that it didn't really impact the height, it simply centered our
flex items along the cross axis.
That's really important because our cross axis, right now we have flex direction column,
so this means our cross axis goes from left right here to the right
and as you can see right here in the center, we now centered our items.
If I change it back to row now right here, like that and reload the page, we centered our items along the
cross axis, which is now from the top left corner to the bottom left corner.
Now let me change it back to column though because I want to show you something else because if we apply
another value for our align items property right here, for example flex start, this one, then you can
see that if I reload that, the items are now centered at the beginning,
well flex start, of our cross axis. Again, the cross axis now is from top left to the top right.
We could also use flex enter for example, like this
and if reload the page now, you can see the items are now centered along the cross axis
but at the end of it. If I would change the flex direction back to row, like this right here and reload
the page, then it is centered as you can see, at the end of the cross axis which now again goes from the top
left corner to the bottom left corner.
And what you can see right now of course is that now it has again an impact onto the height
but keep in mind that this is only due to the fact that our cross axis now goes from the top to the
bottom and that the items are aligned to the bottom now,
so flex end, that's really important to keep in mind right here.
So with that, we saw that align items always refers to the cross axis
and now the question we might ask ourselves is, OK but what about the main axis?
Now we can of course also define the position of our items along the main axis or along the main and
cross axis in combination. For that, let me first maybe increase the height of our container a bit, right
here.
Let's say we use a height of, I don't know, 500 pixels,
let's see what this looks like,
yes I think a bit more, makes sense, let's say 800 pixels right here,
yes I think this is fine.
So if we now change the align items right here to center maybe like that, then as you know in the
meanwhile, we have the cross axis from top to bottom,
so the items are centered right here
and as you can see, they are kind of starting to the left, to the beginning or at the beginning of the
main axis,
so right here. If I now add another property which is called justify content,
this one right here and if I now would also apply a value of center to it, like that and reload the page,
then you can see that the items are now both centered along the cross axis because of align items
and at the same time, centered along the main axis because of justify content.
If we would now change the flex direction to column again and therefore, kind of switch the main axis
and cross axis, like that, then you can see this behavior right here because basically the space we have
is not enough for our flex container.
So if I increased height a bit more maybe, let's say to 1300, something like that,
let's see,
yes
now it's sufficient,
so that's maybe better to see now.
So you can see now basically that we now have the cross axis from left to right, right here which
is specified by align items and we have the main axis now from top to bottom, which is specified by
justify content.
So if I say justify content flex end right here once again, like that and reload the page, you can
see that the items now start at the end of the main axis,
so from here to here
and if I would now change align items to flex start maybe, like that and go back there and reload
the page,
you can see that the items are not displayed at the beginning of the cross axis which is from left
to right now, as we have flex direction column, that's important to keep in mind
and our main axis goes from top to bottom,
here we have flex end for justify content right here.
Now let me maybe change it back to center though because I think this looks a bit better
and if we reload that now, looks like that.
And additionally, although we played around now, I think this can still be a bit of a lot of information
to keep in mind.
Therefore, let's go back to the slides once again and summarize what we just learned right here.
So align items, justify content, main axis, cross axis,
oh my God, that's a bit too much.
It's actually not
because let's just summarize that in easy words now
because what we basically did is we applied a flex direction of row,
this led to the following behavior inside our flex container right here.
We basically had a main axis going from the top left corner to the top right corner, the cross axis
went from the top left to the bottom left,
that's what we saw and what we learned already.
Now then we added justify content as a property
and we added align items as a property. In case of flex direction row, justify content simply defines
this,
it defines the positioning of our flex elements along the main axis. Align items simply defines the positioning
along the cross axis of our elements,
so in combination of justify content, align items and flex direction, we kind of have a lot of
control about our items, then we applied flex direction column.
With that, you remember the previous slide we have? We change basically the main axis of our flex container
because now, the cross axis takes over the place of the initial main axis and with that, the main axis
goes from the top left corner to the bottom left corner. From a justify content and the align items perspective,
we could also say that these two switched their positions because align items now simply defines the positioning
of the elements along the cross axis which is now basically along the row you could say and justify
content defines the element position along the main axis, which is now the column,
just remember that.
So in the end, you can actually easily memorize that by saying that justify content refers to the main
axis and the main axis depends on the flex direction and the align items refers to the cross axis,
that's it actually.
And with that, we summarize the core concept but still, you might want to dive deeper into that and a
very good resource for that is again the MDN. You can find a link to this page right here attached to
the video
and if you scroll down, you can find some general information about flexbox
but the more interesting part is this one right here because if you click onto align items for example,
you can find a lot of information about the different values you can apply for this align items property.
Now I will not dive into all of these values because to be honest, I think it's important to understand
the basic concept but then you can play around with the values right here
but one interesting value I would like to show you though is this one right here, align items baseline
because if we apply that to our project right here,
so let's say we use align items baseline and we change the flex direction back to a row though and then
reload the page,
then you can see something interesting.
I'm not sure if it becomes totally clear to be honest,
so let me zoom in a bit maybe,
yes I think right here you can see it.
The items are now no longer aligned right here to the top
for example of the boxes but they are aligned to the baseline of the actual content,
can you see it? This right here is the bottom of the x and that's the same position that the h right here
has.
So that's the align items
baseline declaration
we can also use for example.
However, this is probably not the value we want to apply right here, so let's change it back to, well maybe
center wasn't the worst one I think, like that,
yes I think this looks better.
And with that, we actually almost saw all the properties we can use in combination with the flex container,
there is only one last property that I would like to show you.